A Multi-Tier Genetic Algorithm for Large-Scale Liner 
Shipping Network Design 
Rampersand Nirmal1A and Gukhool Oomesh1B 
1 University of Mauritius, Réduit, 80837, Mauritius 
Anirkramp@gmail.com 
Bo.gukhool@uom.ac.mu 
Abstract.  
The Liner Shipping Network Design Problem (LSNDP) is a combinatorial opti-
misation problem that jointly determines vessel routes, fleet deployment and 
cargo routing to maximise profit while satisfying weekly demand. As traditional 
methods struggle to scale efficiently for realistic global liner shipping networks, 
this study proposes a hierarchical hub-and-spoke Genetic Algorithm (GA) archi-
tecture designed with a demand-driven network construction strategy. A new for-
mulation is proposed that maximises profit as well as demand delivery. The pro-
posed framework integrates four routing strategies including direct services, in-
ter-regional trunk routes, feeder services and regional loops to improve network 
connectivity and cargo accessibility. The developed Multi-Tier GA incorporates 
demand-based chromosome initialisation, adaptive mutation, elitism, tournament 
selection as well as an aggressive demand-weighted fitness function. In order to 
allocate vessels across multiple categories, demand-proportional allocation strat-
egies are employed. Experiments conducted on benchmark instances from the 
Liner-Lib dataset demonstrate that the proposed Multi-Tier architecture and de-
mand-driven optimisation strategy significantly improve solution quality, scala-
bility and convergence behaviour on large scale problem instances. It achieves 
an average demand fulfilment of 91.5% with profits exceeding 37 million USD 
with a very fast execution time of 158s on the WorldSmall instance. These find-
ings indicate that the proposed Multi-Tier GA algorithm provides an effective 
and scalable approach for large-scale liner shipping network design. 
Keywords: GA, optimisation, liner shipping network design problem 
1 
Introduction 
Global liner shipping networks are critical components of maritime freight transporta-
tion as they enable the movement of large volumes of containerised cargo worldwide 
[1]. Designing an efficient Liner Shipping Network (LSN) involves determining opti-
mal vessel routes, fleet deployment and cargo routing while satisfying operational con-
straints [2]. Due to the scale and combinatorial complexity of this problem, the Liner 
Shipping Network Design Problem (LSNDP) is widely recognised as an NP-hard opti-
misation problem [3].  
 

=====PAGE=====
2  
Rampersand Nirmal and Gukhool Oomesh 
 
Modern LSN are also affected by growing network scale, increasing cargo demand, 
fluctuating fuel prices route durations and service schedules. As a result, maintaining 
high demand delivery remains a major challenge for large-scale global LSNs [4]. In 
addition, traditional exact optimisation methods struggle to scale efficiently on large 
global LSNDP instances due to its large search space [5]. Consequently, heuristic [6] 
and hybrid [7] optimisation approaches have been investigated for solving the LSNDP. 
However existing studies rely heavily on predefined hub-and-spoke structures or sim-
plified route assumptions which may limit network scalability on large scale inter-re-
gional LSNs [8]. 
 
This paper proposes a Multi-Tier GA for solving the LSNDP using a hierarchical route 
construction framework and a demand-oriented optimisation process. The proposed 
framework uses of a combination of direct routes, trunk services, feeder connections 
and regional loops for efficient network construction. A new formulation that maxim-
ises profit while maximising demand-delivery and satisfying operational constraints is 
also proposed along with a fitness function that integrates weighted-demand fulfilment 
rewards. 
 
The literature review presents existing studies related to the LSNDP as well as existing 
optimisation approaches. The problem formulation section defines the proposed 
LSNDP formulation and optimisation objectives. The methods section introduces the 
Multi-Tier GA and hierarchical routing structure. The results and discussion section 
presents the experimental findings, convergence behaviour and comparative analysis. 
Lastly, the conclusion summarises key findings of the study and outlines future research 
directions. 
2 
Literature review 
Various approaches including mathematical programming-based approaches, heuristic 
approaches and hybrid methods have been developed to solve the LSNDP [5]. While 
mathematical programming methods such as MIP [9] are capable of generating optimal 
or near-optimal results, their computational performance degrades rapidly as the net-
work size and problem complexity grows with execution times higher than 10800 sec-
onds for instances with 19-ports only [10]. Heuristic-based introduced techniques such 
as column generation [11], branch and price [12], tabu search [13] and GA [14]. These 
approaches offer good quality but sub-optimal solutions and have the ability of solving 
small and medium problem instances but also struggle with designing large scale global 
LSNs. More advanced hybrid approaches [7, 15–17] combine multiple optimisation 
algorithms, heuristics and metaheuristics together to leverage the strengths of different 
algorithms and improve solution quality or computational efficiency. These algorithms 
provide good-quality but sub-optimal solutions but are scalable and allow large global 
LSNDP instances such as WorldSmall to be solved. However, they require careful pa-
rameter tuning and choice of components. 
 

=====PAGE=====
 
Contribution Title (shortened if too long) 
3 
Nature-inspired metaheuristics such as evolutionary algorithms [18] or swarm-based 
algorithms [19] have also been increasingly investigated for solving large-scale LSNDP 
instances due to their ability to explore complex search spaces efficiently. Existing 
studies have explored metaheuristics such as Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) [20], 
Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO) [21] and GA[14]. GAs operate on a population of 
candidate solutions and apply genetic operators such as selection, crossover and muta-
tion to evolve solutions over successive generations [22]. Cariou et al. [14] show that 
their GA-based solution has the ability of finding an optimal solution to the LSNDP 
even when introducing complexities such as emission control areas. This indicates that 
GAs offer a promising avenue for research due to their ability to explore large search 
spaces and their flexibility in handling multiple objectives and constraints. Moreover, 
they are particularly suitable for the LSNDP due to their ability to simultaneously op-
timise vessel assignment, route construction and cargo routing while maintaining solu-
tion diversity during optimisation. A few studies have also adopted hub-and-spoke rout-
ing structures to simplify network construction and improve computational efficiency 
[8, 23]. These approaches typically use major transhipment hubs connected through 
trunk services while feeder routes connect secondary regional ports. Although hub-and-
spoke architectures improve scalability, many existing studies rely on pre-defined hub 
structures and simplified routing assumptions [24, 25]. This may restrict routing flexi-
bility and efficiency while also limiting demand delivery across large inter-regional 
LSNs. 
 
While significant progress has been achieved in optimising the LSNDP, solving large-
scale global instances such as WorldSmall [13] with high profitability while maintain-
ing high demand delivery remains computationally challenging. Therefore, this study 
addresses these limitations by proposing a Multi-Tier GA that uses a hierarchical rout-
ing framework. 
3 
Problem Formulation 
The LSNDP has been formulated as a graph-based combinatorial optimisation problem 
where ports are represented as nodes and possible routes as edges. The objective of the 
optimisation problem is to maximise profit while maximising demand-delivery and sat-
isfying operational constraints such as fleet availability, vessel capacity and schedules. 
The LSNDP is represented using a directed graph 𝐺= (𝑃, 𝐸) where 𝑃 represents the 
set of ports and 𝐸 the set of feasible sailing connections between ports. Each demand 
is defined as an origin-destination pair with an associated cargo quantity and transpor-
tation revenue. Vessel routes are generated through combinations of direct services, 
trunk services, feeder services and regional loop structures within the proposed multi-
tier architecture. The optimisation problem simultaneously determines vessel deploy-
ment, route allocation, cargo routing and service connectivity.  
The variables used in the objective function including sets and parameters have been 
defined as follows. 𝑃 represents the set of ports, 𝑉 defines the set of available vessels, 
𝐷 consists of the set of demands, 𝐻 encapsulates the set of hub ports while 𝑅 is the set 

=====PAGE=====
4  
Rampersand Nirmal and Gukhool Oomesh 
 
of generated vessel routes. The sailing distance between ports 𝑖 and 𝑗 is represented by 
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡!". 𝑞!" refers to the weekly demand between ports 𝑖 and 𝑗 and the capacity of a 
vessel 𝑣 is defined as 𝑐𝑎𝑝#. While 𝑇$%& is the maximum allowable route cycle duration 
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒', defines the total sailing time of route 𝑟. Costs involve the weekly operational 
cost of each vessel (𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡#), port-related cargo handling costs (𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡!") including 
loading, unloading, transhipment and fixed port call costs associated with transporting 
cargo between ports 𝑖 and 𝑗. Revenues include 𝑟𝑒𝑣!" which is the revenue generated 
per transported forty-foot-equivalent(FFE) container between ports 𝑖 and 𝑗 as well as 
the weekly charter revenue generated when vessel 𝑣 is not deployed (𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟#). 
 
The defined decision variables consist of 𝑥#' which represents the assignment of ves-
sel vessel 𝑣 to route 𝑟, The variables take the value 1 if vessel 𝑣 is assigned to route 𝑟 
and the value of 0 otherwise. The decision variable 𝑦!" represents the amount of cargo 
transported between ports 𝑖 and 𝑗 and the binary decision 𝑧!"' indicates whether de-
mand between ports 𝑖 and 𝑗 is served through route 𝑟. The variable takes a value of 1 
if the demand is routed through route 𝑟, and 0 otherwise. 
3.1 
Objective function 
max 𝑍= D
𝑟𝑒
(!,")∈,
𝑣!" .  𝑦!" + D
charter#(1 −D
𝑥#'
'∈.
)
/∈0
−D
𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡!" .  𝑦!"
(!,")∈,
−D
D
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡#
'∈.
#∈1
 .  𝑥#'(1) 
 
The objective function (EQ 1) maximises operational profit as well as cargo delivery. 
Profit is calculated as the difference between transportation revenue and vessel operat-
ing costs. The first term represents total transportation revenue, the second term repre-
sents charter revenue generated from unused vessels, the third term represents port-
related cargo handling and port call costs while the fourth term represents vessel oper-
ational costs including fuel costs. Revenue is obtained after successfully transporting 
demands between origin and destination ports while operational costs are derived from 
vessel charter, route deployment costs and canal costs. Unused vessels which are char-
tered out contribute to the profits. Route operating costs are from sailing duration rela-
tive to the weekly scheduling horizon and port costs are calculated from the list of vis-
ited ports. 
 
The optimisation framework incorporates several operational constraints to ensure that 
generated shipping networks remain feasible and realistic. Fleet availability constraints 
enforces that each vessel may only be assigned to a single route to ensure feasible vessel 
deployment across the network. Vessel capacity constraints make sure that the quantity 
of transported cargo must not exceed the carrying capacity of the assigned vessels. De-
mand satisfaction constraints prevent the transported cargo between an origin and des-
tination pair from exceeding the total weekly demand. Route duration constraint limits 
vessel routes so that they remain within the maximum allowable route cycle duration 
to maintain feasible service schedules. Route feasibility constraints only allow cargo to 

=====PAGE=====
 
Contribution Title (shortened if too long) 
5 
be transported if a valid connection exists between the origin and destination ports 
through direct services, feeder routes or trunk connections. Lastly, network connectiv-
ity constraints ensure that all generated routes must maintain valid sailing connections 
between consecutive ports.  
4 
Methods 
This study proposes a Multi-Tier GA for solving the formulated LSNDP to generate 
feasible and profitable LSN for large-scale benchmark instances. The methodology ex-
plains how the hierarchical hub-and-spoke routing framework that combines hierar-
chical network construction, demand-driven route allocation and evolutionary enhance-
ments have been integrated in the base GA [26]. 
 
In order to reduce excessive search space exploration while improving scalability and 
network connectivity, a hierarchical Multi-Tier routing architecture has been imple-
mented by incorporating structured network generation and demand-oriented heuristics 
as depicted in Algorithm 1. Unlike several existing LSN design studies which primarily 
adopt traditional hub-and-spoke structures with predefined or limited hub configura-
tions [8], the proposed framework integrates a hierarchical Multi-Tier routing architec-
ture that combines direct routes, trunk services, feeder connections and transhipment-
based routing. First a directed LSN is constructed from demand, fleet, distance and port 
data. Then the GA generates candidate LSNs through route assignment and vessel al-
location strategies. Each of the generated candidate solutions is evaluated based on 
metrics including profitability, demand delivery and fleet utilisation. The optimisation 
process iteratively improves the population using crossover, mutation, elitism and tour-
nament-based selection until convergence criteria are satisfied. 
 
Algorithm 1: Multi-Tier GA for LSN Design 
1:  Load benchmark dataset, generate port mappings, distance ma-
trices and fleet. Classify and Assign ports to geographical re-
gions and define regional transhipment hubs. 
2:  Initialise population of candidate shipping networks 
3:  For each candidate solution, generate routes and allocate 
vessels according to demand distribution 
4:  Evaluate fitness of all candidate solutions 
5:  For each generation: 
6:     Sort population according to fitness score and preserve 
elite solutions 
7:     Select parent solutions using tournament selection 
8:     Generate offspring using crossover and adaptive mutation 
9:     Evaluate offspring fitness and update population 
10:    Update global best solution 
11:    If convergence criterion is satisfied, exit 
12: Return best shipping network solution 

=====PAGE=====
6  
Rampersand Nirmal and Gukhool Oomesh 
 
4.1 
Network construction 
This framework uses data from the Liner-Lib benchmark dataset [13] which contains 
port information, sailing distances, vessel specifications and demand data.  The prob-
lem is converted into a graph-based network by representing ports as nodes and sailing 
routes between ports as directed edges. Demand matrices are also constructed using 
weekly demand between origin and destination ports. Then the network is divided into 
three major geographical regions consisting of Asia, Europe and America. Tranship-
ment hubs are assigned within each region to support both intra-regional and inter-re-
gional cargo flows. Vessel classes are categorised into trunk and feeder vessel groups 
according to carrying capacity and vessel type. Candidate direct routes are first gener-
ated from the highest-demand origin-destination pairs exceeding predefined demand 
thresholds. Inter-regional demand is subsequently aggregated to generate hub-to-hub 
trunk services. Feeder routes are then generated by connecting secondary ports to re-
gional hubs using demand-weighted allocation strategies. Lastly, the remaining vessels 
are assigned to regional loop services to improve local accessibility and increase overall 
fleet utilisation. 
4.2 
Chromosome encoding 
Each chromosome represents a complete shipping network consisting of vessel-route 
assignments across the four routing tiers as shown in Fig 1. Initial candidate solutions 
are generated using demand-oriented heuristics rather than purely random assignment. 
Fig. 1. GA chromosome encoding representation
 
4.3 
Multi-Tier routing architecture 
The proposed hierarchical routing structure helps to balance long-haul cargo transpor-
tation with regional accessibility for shorter cargo movement while reducing network 
fragmentation and excessive transhipment dependency. The architecture also prioritises 
high-demand shipping corridors while maintaining feasible operational structures dur-
ing the initialisation and optimisation processes. The proposed framework categorises 
the LSN into four routing tiers including Direct routes (Tier 0), Trunk routes (Tier 1), 
Feeder routes (Tier 2) and Regional loops (Tier 3). High-demand origin-destination 

=====PAGE=====
 
Contribution Title (shortened if too long) 
7 
pairs are assigned dedicated direct shipping services (Tier 0) to reduce transhipment 
operations and improve cargo delivery efficiency and cost-effectiveness. Inter-regional 
cargo movements are handled through high-capacity hub-to-hub trunk services (Tier 1) 
connecting major transhipment hubs across geographical regions. Feeder services(Tier 
2) connect secondary ports to regional hub ports to improve accessibility and cargo 
delivery. Residual vessels are assigned to short regional circular services (Tier 3) to 
improve local connectivity and make use of remaining fleet capacity. 
4.4 
Fitness evaluation 
𝐹𝑖𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠(𝑥) = 𝑍(𝑥) + 𝛼Q
R
𝑦!"
(!,")∈,
R
𝑞!"
(!,")∈,
S (2) 
The fitness function extends the objective function (EQ 1) by incorporating demand-
fulfilment rewards. The final term represents weighted cargo demand fulfilment. The 
parameter 𝛼 controls the importance of demand fulfilment within the optimisation pro-
cess. The fitness function evaluates candidate solutions based profit and demand deliv-
ery percentage. Cargo demand is evaluated hierarchically using direct transportation, 
intra-regional hub routing and inter-regional multi-hop routing. Direct transportation is 
prioritised whenever sufficient link capacity exists between origin and destination 
ports. If direct transportation is unavailable the framework attempts feeder-to-hub rout-
ing within the same geographical region. For inter-regional transportation the frame-
work evaluates a three-stage routing structure consisting of origin feeder service, hub-
to-hub trunk transportation and destination feeder service.  
 
In order to prioritise demand fulfilment throughout the evolutionary optimisation pro-
cess, the proposed framework applies aggressive demand-weight fitness scoring. Large 
weighting coefficients (𝛼) for demand fulfilment relative to the direct profit component 
of the fitness function are employed. Candidate solutions generating positive opera-
tional profit receive an additional demand reward weighted by a coefficient of 2.2×106 
while loss-generating solutions still receive a substantial demand weight of 1.3×106. 
This scoring strategy was introduced following earlier experiments where the GA con-
verged prematurely towards sparse but highly profitable solutions with limited vessel 
deployment and poor demand delivery as vessels were just being chartered to generate 
profit. The aggressive weighting mechanism therefore shifts the optimisation pressure 
towards large-scale cargo fulfilment and broader network connectivity. This encour-
ages the GA to deploy additional vessels, expand route coverage and construct denser 
transportation networks capable of serving a substantially larger proportion of demand. 
The fitness evaluation thus penalises infeasible route structures, excessive route dura-
tion, insufficient vessel deployment, disconnected services and low-capacity network 
configurations. 
 
Tournament Selection, crossover, adaptive mutation and elitism 
Tournament selection is employed to select parent chromosomes where candidate so-
lutions compete in such a way that higher-quality solutions possess greater probability 
of selection. This approach preserves population diversity throughout the optimisation 

=====PAGE=====
8  
Rampersand Nirmal and Gukhool Oomesh 
 
process. In addition, the crossover operator generates offspring solutions by inheriting 
vessel-route assignments from two parent chromosomes. Individual vessel routes are 
copied from either parent solution. This allows beneficial route structures and high-
performing network components to propagate throughout subsequent generations with-
out breaking route structures or violating constraints. Moreover, an adaptive mutation 
strategy is implemented to balance exploration and exploitation during optimisation. 
Higher mutation rates are applied during early generations to encourage broader search 
space exploration while mutation intensity gradually decreases during later generations 
to improve convergence stability. Mutation operations include route removal, route re-
assignment, route regeneration, hub-to-hub route generation, feeder route generation 
and random vessel redeployment. Elitism is incorporated to preserve high-quality so-
lutions between generations. The best-performing individuals are copied directly into 
subsequent generations to prevent the loss of strong candidate networks during evolu-
tion. 
5 
Results and discussion 
The proposed framework was evaluated using the WorldSmall benchmark instance 
from the LINER-LIB dataset. The benchmark contains a large number of ports, vessel 
classes and cargo demand combinations which makes it suitable for evaluating the 
scalability and operational performance of the proposed optimisation framework. 
 
Initial experiments were conducted on a baseline GA capable of balancing profits and 
demand delivery. The baseline GA was developed based on the formulated LSNDP and 
managed to generate profitable solutions across all benchmark instances. The baseline 
GA performed well on smaller instances such as Baltic where it achieved 6.5 x 105 USD 
profits on average while delivery 99.6% demand. However, the baseline demonstrated 
limited scalability and poor performance on larger benchmark instances such as the 
WorldSmall instance. These initial results indicated that demand fulfilment deteriorated 
significantly as the network size increased with the WorldSmall benchmark only 
achieving 15.9% demand delivery and 25.8 x 107 profit. Further analysis of the gener-
ated LSN revealed that the optimisation process converged towards sparse profitable 
solutions with limited fleet deployment. Premature convergence was also observed 
which led to insufficient exploration for instances with larger search spaces.  
 
In order to address these limitations, the Multi-Tier GA using the hierarchical frame-
work introduced adaptive mutation and stagnation handling mechanisms. Diversifica-
tion phases were also added when no significant improvement in fitness values were 
observed for consecutive generations. The proposed hierarchical framework also ex-
tends vessel cycle duration limits between 4 to 8 weeks provided that more vessels are 
deployed so that each port is still serviced at least once bi-weekly. This modification 
substantially increased feasible long-haul connectivity between Asia, Europe and 
America. Subsequent experiments involved integrating a hierarchical hub-and-spoke 
architecture consisting of trunk routes, feeder routes and regional loops in the proposed 

=====PAGE=====
 
Contribution Title (shortened if too long) 
9 
GA. Dedicated regional hubs were assigned to Asia, Europe and America while vessels 
were segmented into trunk and feeder deployment groups. Larger vessels were hence 
allocated to inter-regional trunk services while smaller vessels were used to connect 
secondary ports to regional hubs. The final configuration of the Multi-Tier GA used a 
population of 200 individuals with elitism preservation of 25 individuals. A minimum 
direct route threshold of 260 FFE and an allocation of at least 75 direct routes as well 
as a minimum vessel deployment threshold of 50 vessels across trunk and feeder vessel 
classes were set. The optimisation process was executed until convergence or termina-
tion criteria were satisfied with early stopping triggered if no improvement in fitness 
score was observed over 30 consecutive generations. 
 
The final results for the Multi-Tier GA reveal an profit of 37.2 x 106 USD and a maxi-
mum profit of 37.2 x 106 USD. Demand delivery averaged at 91.5 % and peaked at 
93.4% while the runtime had an average of 157.7 seconds. Only 171 vessels were used 
to service the entire network which represent a 13.2 % improvement in fleet deployment 
efficiency compared to the baseline GA. These results indicate that hierarchical routing 
structure substantially improved network scalability and profitability without impacting 
on computational efficiency. Only a 3% increase in runtime but a 47% increase in prof-
its as well as a 73.7% in demand delivery were observed with the hierarchical frame-
work. These results show a significant improvement from the baseline and the initial 
results. 
 
Fig. 2. Proposed GA’s convergence behaviour across generations 
Moreover, the convergence behaviour of the proposed Multi-Tier GA demonstrates sta-
ble optimisation performance across generations. Fig 2 shows that both profits and de-
mand delivery improved consistently before stabilising around generation 180. Profit 
was initially negative due to high operational cost of early networks but progressively 
converged towards stable profitable solutions exceeding 37 million USD. Demand de-
livery improved also improved rapidly before stabilising around 90% during later gen-
erations where it maintained stable demand fulfilment performance. In addition, the 
Multi-Tier GA started with around 220 vessels deployed but gradually reduced exces-
sive fleet assignment to around 170 used vessels. This indicates that the optimisation 

=====PAGE=====
10  
Rampersand Nirmal and Gukhool Oomesh 
 
process progressively identified more cost effective and efficient service route config-
urations.  Moreover, only 3% variance in profit was noted across 10 runs of the algo-
rithm. The findings therefore reveal that convergence behaviour during later genera-
tions had minimal fluctuations in profit, demand fulfilment and vessel deployment. This 
indicates that the proposed Multi-Tier GA successfully converged towards a stable 
near-optimal LSN. 
 
The best solution generated by the Multi-Tier GA reveals that bunker (fuel) cost is the 
largest contributor to the overall network cost, accounting for approximately 38% of 
total operational costs. Cargo handling costs, which include loading costs, unloading 
costs and transhipment costs represented around 29% while vessel charter costs con-
tributed to 23% of total costs. Canal fees and port call fees account for much smaller 
proportions. This new algorithm also reveals that the proposed framework strongly fa-
vours short-direct services, two-port or three port services. Approximately 90% of the 
cargo delivered was transhipped while only 10% was transported using direct services. 
This behaviour reflects the importance of hub-and-spoke connectivity within large-
scale global LSNs. Moreover, the framework prioritised high-demand inter-regional 
corridors linking Asia, Europe and America. Demand delivery across regional pairs 
exceeded 90% in all scenarios and this reinforces the need for strong global connectiv-
ity within the Liner Shipping field. The findings as depicted also reveal that the Pana-
max and Post-Panamax vessels contribute the majority of the used transportation ca-
pacity while smaller feeder vessels primarily support regional hub connectivity.  
 
The proposed Multi-Tier GA’s performance has been compared with existing studies 
that use the Liner-Lib dataset for the WorldSmall instance. Although the compared 
studies have minimisation objectives, the results are comparable as their negative ob-
jective values correspond to profitable solutions. Koza et al. [15] achieve a profit of 
3.27 × 10⁷ and 86.4% demand delivery. Karsten et al. [16] obtain profits of 3.15 × 10⁷ 
and 82.3% demand delivery while Brouer et al. [13]  present a profit of −1.1 × 106 and 
78.3% demand delivery. In contrast the proposed Multi-Tier GA achieved profits of 
3.72 x 107 which represents an enhancement of 13.7 % higher profits on average when 
compared to the best performing algorithm presented by Koza et al. [15]. Moreover, 
the proposed Multi-Tier GA improves demand delivery by 12.9% and achieves 91.2% 
demand fulfilment. Therefore, this comparison indicates that the proposed Multi-Tier 
GA is not only competitive but performs better than existing algorithms for solving 
global LSNs such as the WorldSmall benchmark instance. The higher demand delivery 
is a result of the hierarchical routing which combines direct services, trunk routes, 
feeder connections and transshipment-heavy cargo routing. 
 
Overall, the results demonstrate that the proposed Multi-Tier GA with the hierarchical 
framework is capable of generating highly profitable and scalable LSNs across large 
benchmark instances while maintaining very strong demand delivery. 

=====PAGE=====
 
Contribution Title (shortened if too long) 
11 
6 
Conclusion 
This paper presented a Multi-Tier GA based on a hierarchical routing framework for 
solving the LSNDP. Experimental results demonstrated strong performance across 
multiple benchmark instances. Moreover, it performed very well on large-scale global 
liner shipping instances such as WorldSmall where it achieved profit margins of over 
37 million USD as well as 91.2% demand delivery while maintaining a stable conver-
gence performance across multiple runs. Comparative analysis against other studies 
shows that the proposed algorithm and framework achieve 13.7 higher profitability and 
12.9% stronger demand delivery as compared to Koza et al. [15] while not compromis-
ing on other costs or constraints in the formulated problem. This study proves that hi-
erarchical hub-and-spoke routing, adaptive mutation strategies and demand-weighted 
fitness evaluations offer a significant optimisation benefits in solving the LSNDP. 
These mechanisms significantly improve scalability, inter-regional connectivity and 
overall LSN effectiveness and computational efficiency while maintaining very strong 
demand delivery performance above 90% for large-scale LSN. Future work can focus 
on extending this framework to incorporate cargo time transit constraints, vessel speed 
optimisation and hybrid metaheuristic approaches. 
Acknowledgments. This work was funded by the Higher Education Commission, Mauritius 
(HEC). The authors also acknowledge the University of Mauritius (UoM) for providing facilities 
and resources for conducting this research. 
Disclosure of Interests. The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to 
the content of this article.  
References 
1. Ulhaq MND, Sudiarso A (2023) A Liner Shipping Network Design Problem: A Systematic Literature 
Review. Journal of Industrial Engineering and Education 1:171–184 
2.  Kjeldsen KH (2017) Classification of Ship Routing and Scheduling Problems in Liner Shipping. 
INFOR: 
Information 
Systems 
and 
Operational 
Research 
49:139–152. 
https://doi.org/10.3138/INFOR.49.2.139 
3.  Brouer BD, Desaulniers G, Pisinger D (2014) A matheuristic for the liner shipping network design 
problem. Transp Res E Logist Transp Rev 72:42–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRE.2014.09.012 
4.  Cheaitou A, Hamdan S, Larbi R (2020) Liner shipping network design with sensitive demand. Maritime 
Business Review 6:293–313. https://doi.org/10.1108/MABR-10-2019-0045/FULL/PDF 
5.  Christiansen M, Hellsten E, Pisinger D, Sacramento D, Vilhelmsen C (2020) Liner shipping network 
design. Eur J Oper Res 286:1–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2019.09.057 
6.  Lan X, Tao Q, Wu X (2023) Liner-Shipping Network Design with Emission Control Areas: A Real 
Case Study. Sustainability 2023, Vol 15, Page 3734 15:3734. https://doi.org/10.3390/SU15043734 
7.  Krogsgaard A, Pisinger D, Thorsen J (2018) A flow-first route-next heuristic for liner shipping network 
design. Networks 72:358–381. https://doi.org/10.1002/NET.21819 
8.  Zheng J, Meng Q, Sun Z (2015) Liner hub-and-spoke shipping network design. Transp Res E Logist 
Transp Rev 75:32–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRE.2014.12.014 

=====PAGE=====
12  
Rampersand Nirmal and Gukhool Oomesh 
 
9.  Ameln M, Sand Fuglum J, Thun K, Andersson H, Stålhane M (2021) A new formulation for the liner 
shipping network design problem. International Transactions in Operational Research 28:638–659. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ITOR.12659 
10. Plum CEM, Pisinger D, Sigurd MM (2014) A service flow model for the liner shipping network design 
problem. Eur J Oper Res 235:378–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2013.10.057 
11. Thun K, Andersson H, Christiansen M (2016) Analyzing complex service structures in liner shipping 
network design. Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal 2016 29:3 29:535–552. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10696-016-9262-6 
12. Hellsten E, Koza DF, Contreras I, Cordeau JF, Pisinger D (2021) The transit time constrained fixed 
charge 
multi-commodity 
network 
design 
problem. 
Comput 
Oper 
Res 
136:105511. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COR.2021.105511 
13. Brouer BD, Alvarez JF, Plum CEM, Pisinger D, Sigurd MM (2013) A Base Integer Programming Model 
and Benchmark Suite for Liner-Shipping Network Design. Transportation Science 48:281–312. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/TRSC.2013.0471 
14. Cariou P, Cheaitou A, Larbi R, Hamdan S (2018) Liner shipping network design with emission control 
areas: A genetic algorithm-based approach. Transp Res D Transp Environ 63:604–621. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRD.2018.06.020 
15. Koza DF, Desaulniers G, Ropke S (2020) Integrated Liner Shipping Network Design and Scheduling. 
Transportation Science 54:512–533. https://doi.org/10.1287/TRSC.2018.0888 
16.  Vad Karsten C, Brouer BD, Pisinger D (2017) Competitive Liner Shipping Network Design. Comput 
Oper Res 87:125–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COR.2017.05.018 
17.  Karsten CV, Brouer BD, Desaulniers G, Pisinger D (2017) Time constrained liner shipping network 
design. Transp Res E Logist Transp Rev 105:152–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRE.2016.03.010 
18.  Bartz-Beielstein T, Branke J, Mehnen J, Mersmann O (2014) Evolutionary Algorithms. Wiley Interdis-
cip Rev Data Min Knowl Discov 4:178–195. https://doi.org/10.1002/WIDM.1124 
19.  Dasgupta D, Michalewicz Z (1997) Evolutionary Algorithms — An Overview. Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 
20.  De A, Mamanduru VKR, Gunasekaran A, Subramanian N, Tiwari MK (2016) Composite particle al-
gorithm for sustainable integrated dynamic ship routing and scheduling optimization. Comput Ind Eng 
96:201–215. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CIE.2016.04.002 
21.  Rampersand N, Gukhool O (2024) Enhanced Liner Shipping Network Design using Ant Colony Opti-
misation. 4th International Conference on Next Generation Computing Applications, NextComp 2024 
- Proceedings. https://doi.org/10.1109/NEXTCOMP63004.2024.10779786 
22.  Holland JH (1992) Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems: An Introductory Analysis with Appli-
cations to Biology, Control, and Artificial Intelligence. The MIT Press 
23.  Gelareh S, Pisinger D (2011) Fleet deployment, network design and hub location of liner shipping com-
panies. Transp Res E Logist Transp Rev 47:947–964. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRE.2011.03.002 
24.  Yang L, Zheng J, Wang J (2025) Hub port location and routing for a single-hub feeder network: Effect 
of 
liner 
shipping 
network 
connectivity. 
Transp 
Policy 
(Oxf) 
160:212–227. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRANPOL.2024.11.009 
25.  Lyu X, Jin JG, Wang Z (2026) Towards net-zero shipping: A multi-level optimization model for green 
maritime corridors integrating bunker network, ship routes, and fleet deployment. Transp Res E Logist 
Transp Rev 206:104595. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRE.2025.104595 
26.  Goldberg DE, Holland JH (1979) Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning 
David E. Goldberg The University of Alabama 
